Tickets/DM-20298 (#2)
lsst-dm/dmtn-248: DMTN-248.tex

% Frequently for a technote we do not want a title page  uncomment this to remove the title page and changelog.
% use \mkshorttitle to remove the extra pages

\section{Introduction}\label{sec:introduction}

Alerts will play a major role in the scientific impact of the LSST.
They are the only data product that is both world public (exempt from any proprietary period) and publicly accessible,

> the latter meaning that they are distributed to community brokers and not solely available via the Rubin Science Platform (RSP).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the latter meaning that they are distributed to community brokers and not solely available via Data Access Centers (DACs) \citeds{RDO-013}.
```

The alert stream and its packets' contents are described in the Data Products Definitions Document (DPDD; \citeds{LSE-163}).
The motivation behind their design is to rapidly distribute all of the LSST data about a difference-image detection that a 
broker (or their users) would need to assess, classify, and prioritize the alert for follow-up observations within minutes.

> This document considers options for the alert stream and alert packet contents to maximize science.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document evaluates options that were considered for the alert stream and alert packet contents to maximize science while minimizing alert packet size and thus bandwidth usage.
These considerations were most salient prior to the selection of the community alert brokers \citedsp{LDM-612}.
```

Most options look at either reducing the packet size, or improving the scientific utility of packet contents.

\textbf{Reduce packet size}:

> The size of an alert packet is estimated to be 82 KB, based on simulations described in Section 3.5 of the DPDD 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The typical size of an alert packet is estimated to be about 82 KB, based on simulations of the alert contents specified in Section 3.5 of the DPDD 
```

(see also the Alerts Key Numbers document; \citeds{DMTN-102}).
Reducing packet size was more of a concern in the earlier days of construction, in order to potentially enable alert 
distribution to additional brokers.
However, even though the the decision to support seven full-stream brokers has been made, considerations of alert packet 

> size are still relevant to, e.g., potentially enable wider full-stream redistribution to downstream brokers or avoiding 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
size are still relevant to, e.g., storage and bandwith usage.
```

> bottlenecks in alert distribution for crowded fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

\item The association of \texttt{DiaSources} into \texttt{DiaObjects} is probabilistic, and in rare cases might change over time 
(e.g., strongly-lensed supernovae, or line-of-sight transient superpositions, where two distinct difference-image sources are 
blended/separated in poor/good seeing).
In such cases the set of all \texttt{DiaSource} records which compose the history might change.
\end{enumerate}

Brokers that save all past alerts in their own archives would be able to retrieve the full records for associated \texttt{DiaSources} 
locally (but not \texttt{DiaForcedSources}, as they would never have been in an alert packet).
Brokers with authenticated RSP access would be able to query the PPDB to retrieve the full records for associated \texttt{DiaSources} 
and \texttt{DiaForcedSources}.
Brokers that do not save all past alerts and/or do not have authenticated RSP access to the PPDB would have no historical 
information aside from the number of associated \texttt{DiaSources} (i.e., the number of past detections).

At best, the lack of historical records in alerts would add a layer of complication and a potential delay to the brokers' 

> functionailty, and inhibit the scientific assessment of time-domain events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functionality, and inhibit the scientific assessment of time-domain events.
```

At worst, it would be a severe risk to brokers' ability to process alerts.

\textbf{Recommendation}: Do not remove historial records, it imposes a risk to time-domain science.

\section{Postage stamps}\label{sec:stamps}

\textbf{Proposal}: Remove image stamps from the alert packets, in favor of one of the two options below, 
with which brokers could instead retrieve the postage stamps for only those alerts for which it is needed 
(e.g., unclassified time-domain events).

The postage stamps are, at minimum, 6$\times$6 arcseconds (30$\times$30 pixels) and contain flux, variance, 
and mask extensions for both the template and difference image, plus a header of metadata (DPDD).
The stamps would account for about 18 KB, or about 20\% of the total alert packet size.

The motivation for including postage stamps in the alert packets is to enable brokers to use image-based 
machine learning tools (e.g., custom real/bogus scores; host+supernova classifiers), 2-dimenstional flux distribution 
(e.g., trailed sources; cometary outbursts), or environmental context (e.g., field crowdedness) to classify or prioritze alerts.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Postage stamps also enable visual inspection of the images by science users, which can be valuable in some contexts.

```

``DELIGHT: Deep Learning Identification of Galaxy Hosts of Transients using Multiresolution Images" (Förster et al. 2022).

The default 6$\times$6 arcsecond postage stamp size is large enough to contain the angular diameter (30 kpc) 
of a Milky Way-like galaxy at a redshift of 0.5, which will be a fairly typical supernova host galaxy in the LSST data set.
The fraction of all alerts that will be low-redshift transients with wide-area host galaxies will be $<$1\% \citedsp{DMTN-102}.

Host association will already be included in the alert packet as part of the \texttt{DiaObject}, as described in \citeds{DMTN-151} 
and in Table 3 of the DPDD, including potential nearby extended and low-redshift galaxies (see columns nearbyExtObj and nearbyLowzGal).

It is expected that this type of host-galaxy identification could be done by accessing the template images 
(which are not subject to the 80 hour embargo) via the image cutout service, via which large-area cutouts could be made.

Although the context provided by larger postage stamps have also been shown to better identify \texttt{DiaSources} that are glints

> (rotating debris in low earth orbit that appears as a row of point sources), ways to identify and flag \texttt{DiaSources}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(rotating debris in low earth orbit that appears as a row of point sources; e.g., Karpov & Peloton 2022), ways to identify and flag \texttt{DiaSources}
```

as potential glints in the AP pipeline are underway, instead of leaving this identification solely to brokers.

Furthermore, although the multi-resolution aspect of the proposal aims to provide a larger area without significantly

> adding to the size of the alert packet, it is currently unclear, e.g., how much extra header information is added, or whether the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
adding to the size of the alert packet, it is currently unclear whether serialization of the multi-resolution cutouts could be achieved without requiring custom display tools and/or increasing overheads from image headers.
```

> FITS would need multiple extensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

\textbf{Recommendation}: At this time, do not increase the size of postage stamps, but potentially reconsider in the future.

\section{Packet compression}\label{sec:compression}

\textbf{Proposal}: Compress alert packets to reduce their size.

The application of gzip compression could further reduce the size of a full alert to 65 KB (80\%).
This might help to avoid alert distribution bottlenecks, lower the cost for brokers' storage needs, and potentially enable 
additional full streams in the future -- all of which could positively impact time-domain science with the LSST.

However, the time and computational resources required to compress the alert packets needs to be considered.

> For example, gzip compression at 50 MB/s to compress 10000 alerts could take 10000 $\times$ 0.08 MB per alert, 50 MB/s, or 

Reviewer: I'm confused about the numbers here.  Remember that each CCD is processed independently, so there are only 50-200 alerts per CCD that need to be compressed.  At 50 MB/s compression speed (where does that come from?) that's a sub-second overhead.

It does increase complexity for an only modest gain in storage--you might say that Avro is already a binary format, and has the ability to do internal compression.

Author: Agree. Rewrote to say the following instead:

The time and computational resources required to compress the alert packets needs to be considered.
For a ballpark estimate, a quick search for "how fast is gzip compression" yeilds a rate of 50 MB/s.
For 50-200 alerts per ccd, that's only 16 MB to be compressed to 13 MB, and it would take about 0.32 seconds;
not a significant fraction of the 60 second alert production latency budgent.

However, compressing the alert packets forces brokers to then decompress the alerts on arrival, which would incur further delay.
Science goals requiring very low-latency alerts distribution might be negatively impacted by compression.
In general, it seems that compressing alert packets would increase complexity for an only modest gain in storage space.

Reviewer: What if we just said something like, "At this point we don't believe we need to sacrifice latency in order to achieve bandwidth savings, but we may revisit this tradeoff as we begin testing alert distribution at scale in the USDF"

Author: Yup, keep it simple, like it -- replaced the paragraphs with that statement verbatim.

16 seconds, which is very significant in light of the 60 second alert distribution timescale. 

Furthermore, compressing the alert packets forces brokers to then decompress the alerts on arrival, which would incur further delay.
Science goals requiring very low-latency alerts distribution might be negatively impacted by compression.

> Compression would only be viable if an algorithm could provide a compression rate of 10 MB/s, requiring only a few seconds 

Reviewer: This doesn't make sense: the compression speed should be *faster* than 50 MB/s per the logic above?

Author: Yeah good catch, I messed it up somehow -- deleted that line.

to compress a visit's worth of alerts.

\textbf{Recommendation}: Do not compress alert packets, it imposes a risk to rapid time-domain science.

\section{Multiple packet formats}\label{sec:multiformats}

\textbf{Proposal}: Allow brokers to specify whether their stream should have histories or postage stamps removed.

The main motivation here is not scientific, but to help reduce brokers' processing costs spent removing unneeded information 
from alert packets. 

There are a few drawbacks to this proposal, but they are mostly technical:

\begin{enumerate}
\item New scope, as the current plan is for Prompt Processing to create a uniform alert packet, and this would create additional provenance work for Rubin (i.e., tracking which alerts were sent to which broker).

> \item Streams of full-sized packets could unfairly suffer delays more often (e.g., in crowded fields).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I'm not sure this is true, let's strike it.

\item Non-identical packets might cause bookkeeping issues for downstream brokers subscribing to multiple brokers.
\end{enumerate}

These drawbacks could impose a risk to the particular science goals of brokers using full-sized or non-identical alerts.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further, during the broker proposal process the approved broker teams all expressed a desire to receive the complete alert packets.
```

\textbf{Recommendation}: Do not offer multiple packet formats.

\section{Pre-filtered streams}\label{sec:prefilter}

\textbf{Proposal}: Allow brokers to request a pre-filtered alert stream, for example to only include alerts in a certain sky 
region or which meet other criteria (e.g., brightness limits, number of past detections).

As with the multiple packet formats, the main motivation here is not scientific, but to help reduce brokers' processing costs 

> spent recieving unwanted alerts, or to enable Rubin Observatory to distribute alerts to more brokers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
spent receiving unwanted alerts, or to enable Rubin Observatory to distribute alerts to more brokers.
```

For example, due to the exponential relationship between the number of variable stars and their variability amplitude, and 
also that of volume and distance modulus, an apparent magnitude limit that is 1 mag brighter than the nominal 5-sigma \texttt{DiaSource} 
detection limit could reduce the alert stream data rate by 50\%.

> However, all seven full-stream brokers have committed to recieving the full stream, and the term downstream broker refers to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, all seven full-stream brokers have committed to receiving the full stream, and the term downstream broker refers to 
```

% Frequently for a technote we do not want a title page  uncomment this to remove the title page and changelog.
% use \mkshorttitle to remove the extra pages

\section{Introduction}\label{sec:introduction}

Alerts will play a major role in the scientific impact of the LSST.
They are the only data product that is both world public (exempt from any proprietary period) and publicly accessible,
the latter meaning that they are distributed to community brokers and not solely available via the Rubin Science Platform (RSP).

The alert stream and its packets' contents are described in the Data Products Definitions Document (DPDD; \citeds{LSE-163}).

> The motivation behind their design is to rapidly distribute all of the LSST data about a difference-image detection which a 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The motivation behind their design is to rapidly distribute all of the LSST data about a difference-image detection that a 
```

Reviewer 2: restrictive clause so that not which

broker (or their users) would need to assess, classify, and prioritize the alert for follow-up observations within minutes.

This document considers options for the alert stream and alert packet contents to maximize science.
Most options look at either reducing the packet size, or improving the scientific utility of packet contents.

\textbf{Reduce packet size}:
The size of an alert packet is estimated to be 82 KB, based on simulations described in Section 3.5 of the DPDD 
(see also the Alerts Key Numbers document; \citeds{DMTN-102}).
Reducing packet size was more of a concern in the earlier days of construction, in order to potentially enable alert 
distribution to additional brokers.
However, even though the the decision to support seven full-stream brokers has been made, considerations of alert packet 
size are still relevant to, e.g., potentially enable wider full-stream redistribution to downstream brokers or avoiding 
bottlenecks in alert distribution for crowded fields.

\textbf{Improve scientific utility}:

> Other options below aim to improve the scientific utility of alert packet contents by providind additional or 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other options below aim to improve the scientific utility of alert packet contents by providing additional or 
```

differently-formatted data.

This document also includes a brief discussion about the science impacts for the various ways of dealing with 
delayed alerts when, e.g., there are $>$40000 alerts per visit (Section \ref{sec:delayed}).

\section{Historical records}\label{sec:histories}

> \textbf{Proposal}: Instead of including the history in every packet, brokers could retrieve it only the fraction 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\textbf{Proposal}: Instead of including the history in every packet, brokers could retrieve it for only the fraction 
```

and \texttt{DiaForcedSources}.
Brokers that do not save all past alerts and/or do not have authenticated RSP access to the PPDB would have no historical 
information aside from the number of associated \texttt{DiaSources} (i.e., the number of past detections).

At best, the lack of historical records in alerts would add a layer of complication and a potential delay to the brokers' 
functionailty, and inhibit the scientific assessment of time-domain events.
At worst, it would be a severe risk to brokers' ability to process alerts.

\textbf{Recommendation}: Do not remove historial records, it imposes a risk to time-domain science.

\section{Postage stamps}\label{sec:stamps}

\textbf{Proposal}: Remove image stamps from the alert packets, in favor of one of the two options below, 
with which brokers could instead retrieve the postage stamps for only those alerts for which it is needed 
(e.g., unclassified time-domain events).

The postage stamps are, at minimum, 6$\times$6 arcseconds (30$\times$30 pixels) and contain flux, variance, 
and mask extensions for both the template and difference image, plus a header of metadata (DPDD).

> The stamps would accounts for about 18 KB, or about 20\% of the total alert packet size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The stamps would account for about 18 KB, or about 20\% of the total alert packet size.
```

machine learning tools (e.g., custom real/bogus scores; host+supernova classifiers), 2-dimenstional flux distribution 
(e.g., trailed sources; cometary outbursts), or environmental context (e.g., field crowdedness) to classify or prioritze alerts.

Two options to replace the inclusion of postage stamps in every alert are:
\begin{enumerate}
\item \textbf{Image cutout service}. Brokers with authenticated RSP access could use the image cutout service to 
create and retrieve stamps.
\item \textbf{URL to the postage stamp}. A URL could be put into the alert instead of the postage stamp, which 
points to an automated public cutout service or the pre-made postage stamps on a server.
\end{enumerate}

Regarding the first option, the 80 hour embargo on all new images and difference images renders the option to use 
an image cutout service non-viable (regardless of whether it is via the RSP or a public service).

The second option has the advantage that brokers (or downstream brokers) do not need to save the stamps and can retrieve 
them at any time, but a disadvantage that stamp retrieval could add a delay to brokers' alert processing and analysis.

> As a side note, the second option is unlikely to cause a bottleneck whe multiple brokers attempt to retrieve large numbers 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a side note, the second option is unlikely to cause a bottleneck when multiple brokers attempt to retrieve large numbers 
```

FITS would need multiple extensions.

\textbf{Recommendation}: At this time, do not increase the size of postage stamps, but potentially reconsider in the future.

\section{Packet compression}\label{sec:compression}

\textbf{Proposal}: Compress alert packets to reduce their size.

The application of gzip compression could further reduce the size of a full alert to 65 KB (80\%).
This might help to avoid alert distribution bottlenecks, lower the cost for brokers' storage needs, and potentially enable 
additional full streams in the future -- all of which could positively impact time-domain science with the LSST.

However, the time and computational resources required to compress the alert packets needs to be considered.
For example, gzip compression at 50 MB/s to compress 10000 alerts could take 10000 $\times$ 0.08 MB per alert, 50 MB/s, or 
16 seconds, which is very significant in light of the 60 second alert distribution timescale. 

Furthermore, compressing the alert packets forces brokers to then decompress the alerts on arrival, which would incur further delay.
Science goals requiring very low-latency alerts distribution might be negatively impacted by compression.

> Compression should only be consisdered if an algorithm could provide a compression rate of 10 MB/s, requiring only a few seconds 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compression would only be viable if an algorithm could provide a compression rate of 10 MB/s, requiring only a few seconds 
```

> to compress a visit's worth of alerts, or if the alert distribution latency requirement is relaxed from 1 minute.

Reviewer 2: "relaxed from 1 minute"  -- I would remove this.  The minimum spec. is 2 mins and we have already said that 2 mins latency will be acceptable in year 1 (PST presentation from Eric  in 2022)  -- there is no current science driver requiring < 5 mins latency (Broker workshop) as it is better for the AP team to focus on other work in AP.  So we have already relaxed  the latency to 2 mins in year 1.

Author: Removed ", or if the alert distribution latency requirement is relaxed from 1 minute", that makes sense.

\textbf{Recommendation}: Do not compress alert packets, it imposes a risk to rapid time-domain science.

> Potentially reconsider compression if it requires only a few seconds per visit.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this alone is sufficient reason to consider adding a step (compression) to the chain, and potential for failures on both ends in compressing and decompressing.  We have already exceeded the number of required full stream brokers by 40% and the only reason to consider compression was to increase the number of full-stream brokers.  I would remove this last sentence.

Author: That makes sense; removed "Potentially reconsider compression if it requires only a few seconds per visit."

\section{Multiple packet formats}\label{sec:multiformats}

\textbf{Proposal}: Allow brokers to specify whether their stream should have histories or postage stamps removed.

The main motivation here is not scientific, but to help reduce brokers' processing costs spent removing unneeded information 
from alert packets. 

There are a few drawbacks to this proposal, but they are mostly technical:

\begin{enumerate}
\item New scope, as the current plan is for Prompt Processing to create a uniform alert packet.
\item Streams of full-sized packets could unfairly suffer delays more often (e.g., in crowded fields).

> \item Non-identical packets might cause bookkeeping issues for downstream brokers subscribing to multiple brokers.

Reviewer 2: and additional provenance work for Rubin -- we will need to manage and track which alerts were sent to which broker.

Author: Indeed; added ", and this would create additional provenance work for Rubin (i.e., tracking which alerts were sent to which broker)." to the first enumerated list item.

\end{enumerate}

These drawbacks could impose a risk to the particular science goals of brokers using full-sized or non-identical alerts.

> \textbf{Recommendation}: None at this time, this is primarily a technical question with little science impact.

Reviewer 2: Isn't the recommendation "Do not support multiple packet formats at this time"  rather than no recommendation at all?

Author: Previously for proposals that didn't really have a scientific motivation I was refraining from a recommendation but yes, we can say it like that -- replaced "None at this time, this is primarily a technical question with little science impact." with "Do not offer multiple packet formats".

> \section{Pre-filtered streams}\label{sec:prefilter}

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it is worth mentioning the AFS via ANTARES here?

Author: In DM-SST I think we decided to not mention that here, so am leaving it out.

\textbf{Proposal}: Allow brokers to request a pre-filtered alert stream, for example to only include alerts in a certain sky 
region or which meet other criteria (e.g., brightness limits, number of past detections).

As with the multiple packet formats, the main motivation here is not scientific, but to help reduce brokers' processing costs 
spent recieving unwanted alerts, or to enable Rubin Observatory to distribute alerts to more brokers.

For example, due to the exponential relationship between the number of variable stars and their variability amplitude, and 
also that of volume and distance modulus, an apparent magnitude limit that is 1 mag brighter than the nominal 5-sigma \texttt{DiaSource} 
detection limit could reduce the alert stream data rate by 50\%.

However, all seven full-stream brokers have committed to recieving the full stream, and the term downstream broker refers to 

> brokers which will ingest a filtered stream of alerts from the full-stream brokers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
brokers which will ingest a filtered stream of alerts from one or more full-stream brokers.
```

\textbf{Recommendation}: There is no need for Rubin Observatory to provide pre-filtered streams to brokers.

\section{When and how to distribute delayed alerts}\label{sec:delayed}

The Data Management System (DMS) is required to support the distribution of at least 40,000 alerts per single standard visit, 

> and for visits producing $\leq$40,000 alerts, no more than 1\% of them fail to have at least 98\% of its alerts distributed 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and for visits producing $\leq$40,000 alerts, no more than 1\% of them may fail to have at least 98\% of their alerts distributed 
```

within 60 seconds of image readout (based on LSR-REQ-0101 in \citeds{LSE-29}; OSS-REQ-0193 in \citeds{LSE-30}; 
and DMS-REQ-0392 and -0393 in \citeds{LSE-61}).

> 

Reviewer 2: Consider separating the above sentence into two - I had to parse it a few times.

Author: Separated: "... standard visit. Furthermore, for visits ..."

Furthermore, alert distribution should degrade gracefully beyond that limit, meaning that visits resulting in an excess of 
40,000 of alerts should not cause any downtime for the Data Management System (DMS; \citeds{LSE-30}, \citeds{LSE-61}).
It is also a requirement that all alerts be stored in an archival database and be available for retrieval 
(OSS-REQ-0185 in \citeds{LSE-30}).

This leaves the open question of what, from a science perspective, is the optimal way of dealing with delayed alerts.
(Aspects of the technical implementation of a graceful degradation, such as distributing delayed alerts and alert archive 
storage access, are out of scope for this document).

There are three main options:

\begin{enumerate}
\item \textbf{Next-opportunity distribution via the alert stream}.
Distribute delayed alerts as soon as possible.

> There are plenty of science goals that do not absolutely require alert distribution in 1 minute, and so distributing delayed 

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth mentioning an referencing here that we have no science use cases requiring distribution in < 5 mins at this time (Broker workshop)

Author: I think we don't need to mention that here, so skipping (hard to reference a lack of something anyway).
